README.md, before:

# vault-cli

A PHP command-line interface for storing encrypted `AES-256` or `AES-128` json data using an encryption key derived from a master password.

![Tests](https://github.com/surgiie/vault-cli/actions/workflows/tests.yml/badge.svg)


## Install

To install, run the following command:

```bash
composer global require surgiie/vault-cli
```

### Supported Storage Drivers

- Local Filesystem

### Supported Ciphers

- aes-128-cbc
- aes-256-cbc
- aes-128-gcm
- aes-256-gcm

### Supported PBKDF Hashing Algorithms

- sha256
- sha512

**Learn more** - [hash_pbkdf2](https://www.php.net/manual/en/function.hash-pbkdf2.php)

## Getting Started

To get started with a new vault, run the following command:

```bash
vault new <name>
```

## Configuration

Once you have a vault to work with, you can start using the cli. The cli reads a configuration from the `~/.vault/config.yaml` file. This file will contain your vault's config and various other options for the cli to work with. For example, in order for the cli to know how to encrypt/decrypt your vault items, you will need to set the encryption options and register your vaults in the config file:

```yaml
vaults:
  your-vault-name:
    algorithm: sha256
    cipher: aes-128-cbc
    driver: local
    iterations: 600000
```

**Note** - The `~/.vault/config.yaml` file will be created for you when you run the `vault new` command and register your vault automatically.

## Selecting a Vault

To select the vault the cli should interact with, use the `vault use` command:

```bash
vault use <your-vault-name>
```

Alternatively, you can manually update the `use-vault` option in the `~/.vault/config.yaml` file:

```yaml
use-vault: <your-vault-name>
vaults:
    your-vault-name:
        # ... your vault options
```
## Storing Items

To store an item in your vault, run the `item:new` command:


`vault item:new github_login --content="somepassword"  --password="<your-encryption-password>"`

This will store encrypted JSON data in the vault. When decrypted, the JSON structure for this example would be:


```json
{
    "name": "github_login",
    "content": "some_password",
}
```

### Loading Content From a File:

If you prefer to load the content for your vault item from a file, use the `--content-file` flag instead of `--content` to load the item content from a file:

`vault item:new some_name --content-file="/path/to/some/file" --password="<your-encryption-password>"`

### Set New Item Content In Terminal Editor:

If you do not pass the `--content` or `--content-file` flag, you will be prompted to set the content by opening a temporary file a terminal editor (`terminal-editor` in your ~/.vault/config.yaml file) as you run the command. Once you close the terminal editor, the command will create the vault item.

### Storing Extra Data

If you want to store extra data along with the vault item, you can pass any arbitrary key/value options to the command:

```bash
vault item:new SOME_NAME
        --content="some secret content" \
        --password="<your-encryption-password>" \
        --something-else="example"
        --extra-data="foo"
```

**Note**: There are options reserved for the command itself and cannot be used for extra data, you can see those listed with the `--help` menu.

This will store a json file with your content encrypted, but when decrypted the structure for this example would be:

```json
{
    "name": "SOME_NAME",
    "content": "some secret content",
    "something-else": "example",
    "extra-data": "foo"
}
```

### Load Content For JSON Keys From Files:

If you want to load the value for a specific key in the JSON data, use the `--key-data-file` option in the format `<key>:<path>`.

For example, to load the content for the `extra-data` key, the command would be:

```bash
vault item:new \
        some_name \
        --content="some secret content" \
        --password="<your-encryption-password>" \
        --key-data-file="extra-data:/path/to/file/with/content"

```

This will store a json file with your content encrypted, but when decrypted the structure for this example would be:

```json
{
    "name": "SOME_NAME",
    "content": "some secret content",
    "something-else": "example",
    "extra-data": "Whatever content was in the file"
}
```



## Categorizing Vault Items With Namespaces

Vault items are grouped/categorized in the `default` namespace. Namespaces are simply directories/folders or filters that vault items will go into. Namespaces are a good way to categorize and filter items based on their use cases. To specify a custom namespace for an item, use the `--namespace` flag:

`vault item:get some-item --namespace=other`

## Use ENV Variables For Passwords

If you do not want to pass the `--password` option to the command, you can set the `VAULT_CLI_PASSWORD` environment variable with your encryption password. The cli will use this as the default password for all commands. When working with multiple vaults, you can set the `VAULT_CLI_<vault-name>_PASSWORD` environment variable to set the password for a specific vault. If not set, the cli will fallback to the global `VAULT_CLI_PASSWORD` environment variable.


## Retrieve Items From Vault

To output the content of an item, use the `item:get` command:

`vault item:get some_item_name`

This will output the decrypted content out.

## Remove Items From Vault

Items maybe removed from the selected vault with the `item:remove` command:

`vault item:remove --name="some_item_name"`

**Note** The `--name` option maybe passed multiple times to remove several items in a single command call.

### Retrieve Full JSON

By default, only the `content` field is printed to the terminal. To print the entire vault item JSON, run the command with the `--json` flag:

`vault item:get some_item_name --json`

## Reencrypting Vault Items

To reencrypt all items in the vault with a new password, use the `reencrypt` command:

```bash
vault reencrypt --old-password=<old-password> --password=<new-password>
```

### Rencrypting With New Encryption Options

If you are updating encryption options, such as switching hashing algorithms or changing iterations, you can overwrite configuration options with the following command line options:

```bash
vault reencrypt
    # old options to decrypt the items first
    --decrypt-algorithm=sha256 \
    --decrypt-iterations=100000 \
    --old-password=<old-password>
    # new options to encrypt the items with
    --algorithm=sha512 \
    --iterations=210000 \
    --cipher=aes-256-cbc \
    --password=<your-new-master-password>
```

**Note** - This command will automatically save your new options to the `~/.vault/config.yaml` file.

### Copy to item content clipboard

To copy a vault item's `content` json key to the clipboard, use the `--copy` flag:

`vault item:get some_item_name --copy`

To copy a specific key from the json, simply pass the json key to the `--json-key` option along with the `--copy` flag:

`vault item:get some_name --copy --json-key=some-key`

To copy the full json payload, set the `--json-key` option to `*` to specify all keys in the json payload to be copied to the clipboard. For example:

`vault item:get some_item_name --copy --json-key="*"`


**Note**: The default binary program used for this is `copy.exe` on windows/WSL2 and `xclip` on linux. Both of these are assumed to be installed. If you want to use a custom command to copy the vault item to clipboard set the `VAULT_CLI_COPY_COMMAND` environment variable with the `:value:` placeholder. e.g `someprogram :value:`.

#### Copying to Clipboard in Docker

Since the clipboard is not shared between your host and the docker container, you will need to capture the output from the command and the pipe this output manually to your desired program.

```bash
output=$(vault item:get example --password=example); echo $output | clip.exe
output=$(vault item:get example --password=example); echo $output | xclip -sel clip

output=$(vault item:get example --json-key="some-key" --password=example); echo $output | clip.exe
output=$(vault item:get example --json-key="*" --password=example); echo $output | xclip -sel clip
```

## Exporting Vault Item Content to Env Files

To export the `content` field of vault items to an env file, use the `export:env-file` command. For example:

`vault export:env-file --export="some-item-name" --export="some-other-item-name"`

This will export the vault item values to a `.env` file in the current directory

In the above example, your `.env` file would have the following variables written:
```
SOME_ITEM_NAME="The content"
SOME_OTHER_ITEM_NAME="The other content"
```
**Note** This will append to an existing `.env` file or create one if it doesn't exist, and overwrite any variables that previously exist. By default, this will add/create to .env in the current directory. To specify a custom name/path, use the `--env-file` option.

### Aliasing/Custom Env Names

If the names of the vault items are not the ones desired for the .env file, you can use aliases by using the `<vault-item-name>:<env-var-name>` format when passing the `--export` options. For example:


`vault export:env-file --export="some-item-name:SOME_CUSTOM_NAME" --export="some-other-item-name:SOME_OTHER_CUSTOM_NAME"` will generate the .env file with the custom env names instead of names of the vault items:

```
SOME_CUSTOM_NAME="The content"
SOME_OTHER_CUSTOM_NAME="The other content"
```

### Including Other/Non-Vault Env Variables In Export.

If you want to include some other env variables in your env file that are not your vault items in the exported `.env` file, you can use the `--include` option:

`vault export:env-file --export="some-item-name" --include="SOME_ENV_VARIABLE_NAME:THE_VALUE`

In this example, `SOME_ENV_VARIABLE_NAME="THE_VALUE"` will be included in your exported .env file.


## Run With Docker:

If you don't have or want to install php, you can run use the provided docker script to spin up a container which you can utilize the cli with.


### Install Docker Script:

```bash
cd /tmp

wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/surgiie/vault-cli/master/docker

chmod +x ./docker

mv ./docker /usr/local/bin/vault

```

```bash
vault --help
```

**Note** - Your `~/.vault` directory will automatically be mounted alont with any `VAULT_CLI_` env variables.

### Attach To Container

To make it easy to exec and attach into the running container created by the docker script, you can run:

```bash
vault attach
```

This is simply a convenient wrapper around `docker exec -it <vault-continer-name><env_vars> sh`

Commit message:

refactor(docker): Script to utilize devcontainer

README.md, after:

# vault-cli

A PHP command-line interface for storing encrypted `AES-256` or `AES-128` json data using an encryption key derived from a master password.

![Tests](https://github.com/surgiie/vault-cli/actions/workflows/tests.yml/badge.svg)


## Install

To install, run the following command:

```bash
composer global require surgiie/vault-cli
```

### Supported Storage Drivers

- Local Filesystem

### Supported Ciphers

- aes-128-cbc
- aes-256-cbc
- aes-128-gcm
- aes-256-gcm

### Supported PBKDF Hashing Algorithms

- sha256
- sha512

**Learn more** - [hash_pbkdf2](https://www.php.net/manual/en/function.hash-pbkdf2.php)

## Getting Started

To get started with a new vault, run the following command:

```bash
vault new <name>
```

## Configuration

Once you have a vault to work with, you can start using the cli. The cli reads a configuration from the `~/.vault/config.yaml` file. This file will contain your vault's config and various other options for the cli to work with. For example, in order for the cli to know how to encrypt/decrypt your vault items, you will need to set the encryption options and register your vaults in the config file:

```yaml
vaults:
  your-vault-name:
    algorithm: sha256
    cipher: aes-128-cbc
    driver: local
    iterations: 600000
```

**Note** - The `~/.vault/config.yaml` file will be created for you when you run the `vault new` command and register your vault automatically.

## Selecting a Vault

To select the vault the cli should interact with, use the `vault use` command:

```bash
vault use <your-vault-name>
```

Alternatively, you can manually update the `use-vault` option in the `~/.vault/config.yaml` file:

```yaml
use-vault: <your-vault-name>
vaults:
    your-vault-name:
        # ... your vault options
```
## Storing Items

To store an item in your vault, run the `item:new` command:


`vault item:new github_login --content="somepassword"  --password="<your-encryption-password>"`

This will store encrypted JSON data in the vault. When decrypted, the JSON structure for this example would be:


```json
{
    "name": "github_login",
    "content": "some_password",
}
```

### Loading Content From a File:

If you prefer to load the content for your vault item from a file, use the `--content-file` flag instead of `--content` to load the item content from a file:

`vault item:new some_name --content-file="/path/to/some/file" --password="<your-encryption-password>"`

### Set New Item Content In Terminal Editor:

If you do not pass the `--content` or `--content-file` flag, you will be prompted to set the content by opening a temporary file a terminal editor (`terminal-editor` in your ~/.vault/config.yaml file) as you run the command. Once you close the terminal editor, the command will create the vault item.

### Storing Extra Data

If you want to store extra data along with the vault item, you can pass any arbitrary key/value options to the command:

```bash
vault item:new SOME_NAME
        --content="some secret content" \
        --password="<your-encryption-password>" \
        --something-else="example"
        --extra-data="foo"
```

**Note**: There are options reserved for the command itself and cannot be used for extra data, you can see those listed with the `--help` menu.

This will store a json file with your content encrypted, but when decrypted the structure for this example would be:

```json
{
    "name": "SOME_NAME",
    "content": "some secret content",
    "something-else": "example",
    "extra-data": "foo"
}
```

### Load Content For JSON Keys From Files:

If you want to load the value for a specific key in the JSON data, use the `--key-data-file` option in the format `<key>:<path>`.

For example, to load the content for the `extra-data` key, the command would be:

```bash
vault item:new \
        some_name \
        --content="some secret content" \
        --password="<your-encryption-password>" \
        --key-data-file="extra-data:/path/to/file/with/content"

```

This will store a json file with your content encrypted, but when decrypted the structure for this example would be:

```json
{
    "name": "SOME_NAME",
    "content": "some secret content",
    "something-else": "example",
    "extra-data": "Whatever content was in the file"
}
```



## Categorizing Vault Items With Namespaces

Vault items are grouped/categorized in the `default` namespace. Namespaces are simply directories/folders or filters that vault items will go into. Namespaces are a good way to categorize and filter items based on their use cases. To specify a custom namespace for an item, use the `--namespace` flag:

`vault item:get some-item --namespace=other`

## Use ENV Variables For Passwords

If you do not want to pass the `--password` option to the command, you can set the `VAULT_CLI_PASSWORD` environment variable with your encryption password. The cli will use this as the default password for all commands. When working with multiple vaults, you can set the `VAULT_CLI_<vault-name>_PASSWORD` environment variable to set the password for a specific vault. If not set, the cli will fallback to the global `VAULT_CLI_PASSWORD` environment variable.


## Retrieve Items From Vault

To output the content of an item, use the `item:get` command:

`vault item:get some_item_name`

This will output the decrypted content out.

## Remove Items From Vault

Items maybe removed from the selected vault with the `item:remove` command:

`vault item:remove --name="some_item_name"`

**Note** The `--name` option maybe passed multiple times to remove several items in a single command call.

### Retrieve Full JSON

By default, only the `content` field is printed to the terminal. To print the entire vault item JSON, run the command with the `--json` flag:

`vault item:get some_item_name --json`

## Reencrypting Vault Items

To reencrypt all items in the vault with a new password, use the `reencrypt` command:

```bash
vault reencrypt --old-password=<old-password> --password=<new-password>
```

### Rencrypting With New Encryption Options

If you are updating encryption options, such as switching hashing algorithms or changing iterations, you can overwrite configuration options with the following command line options:

```bash
vault reencrypt
    # old options to decrypt the items first
    --decrypt-algorithm=sha256 \
    --decrypt-iterations=100000 \
    --old-password=<old-password>
    # new options to encrypt the items with
    --algorithm=sha512 \
    --iterations=210000 \
    --cipher=aes-256-cbc \
    --password=<your-new-master-password>
```

**Note** - This command will automatically save your new options to the `~/.vault/config.yaml` file.

### Copy to item content clipboard

To copy a vault item's `content` json key to the clipboard, use the `--copy` flag:

`vault item:get some_item_name --copy`

To copy a specific key from the json, simply pass the json key to the `--json-key` option along with the `--copy` flag:

`vault item:get some_name --copy --json-key=some-key`

To copy the full json payload, set the `--json-key` option to `*` to specify all keys in the json payload to be copied to the clipboard. For example:

`vault item:get some_item_name --copy --json-key="*"`


**Note**: The default binary program used for this is `copy.exe` on windows/WSL2 and `xclip` on linux. Both of these are assumed to be installed. If you want to use a custom command to copy the vault item to clipboard set the `VAULT_CLI_COPY_COMMAND` environment variable with the `:value:` placeholder. e.g `someprogram :value:`.

#### Copying to Clipboard in Docker

Since the clipboard is not shared between your host and the docker container, you will need to capture the output from the command and the pipe this output manually to your desired program.

```bash
output=$(vault item:get example --password=example); echo $output | clip.exe
output=$(vault item:get example --password=example); echo $output | xclip -sel clip

output=$(vault item:get example --json-key="some-key" --password=example); echo $output | clip.exe
output=$(vault item:get example --json-key="*" --password=example); echo $output | xclip -sel clip
```

## Exporting Vault Item Content to Env Files

To export the `content` field of vault items to an env file, use the `export:env-file` command. For example:

`vault export:env-file --export="some-item-name" --export="some-other-item-name"`

This will export the vault item values to a `.env` file in the current directory

In the above example, your `.env` file would have the following variables written:
```
SOME_ITEM_NAME="The content"
SOME_OTHER_ITEM_NAME="The other content"
```
**Note** This will append to an existing `.env` file or create one if it doesn't exist, and overwrite any variables that previously exist. By default, this will add/create to .env in the current directory. To specify a custom name/path, use the `--env-file` option.

### Aliasing/Custom Env Names

If the names of the vault items are not the ones desired for the .env file, you can use aliases by using the `<vault-item-name>:<env-var-name>` format when passing the `--export` options. For example:


`vault export:env-file --export="some-item-name:SOME_CUSTOM_NAME" --export="some-other-item-name:SOME_OTHER_CUSTOM_NAME"` will generate the .env file with the custom env names instead of names of the vault items:

```
SOME_CUSTOM_NAME="The content"
SOME_OTHER_CUSTOM_NAME="The other content"
```

### Including Other/Non-Vault Env Variables In Export.

If you want to include some other env variables in your env file that are not your vault items in the exported `.env` file, you can use the `--include` option:

`vault export:env-file --export="some-item-name" --include="SOME_ENV_VARIABLE_NAME:THE_VALUE`

In this example, `SOME_ENV_VARIABLE_NAME="THE_VALUE"` will be included in your exported .env file.


## Run With Docker:

If you don't have or want to install php, you can run use the provided docker script to spin up a container which you can utilize the cli with.

**Note** - This script utilizes [devcontainer cli](https://github.com/devcontainers/cli) to manage the container.

### Install Docker Script:

```bash
cd /tmp

wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/surgiie/vault-cli/master/docker

chmod +x ./docker

mv ./docker /usr/local/bin/vault

```

```bash
# start up a container
vault up

# attach to the container and start a bash shell
vault --attach

# run a vault command, e.g:
vault item:get some-item
```

**Note** - Your `~/.vault` directory will automatically be mounted and any `VAULT_CLI_` env variables will automatically be passed to the container.

### Attach To Container

To make it easy to exec and attach into the running container created by the docker script, you can run:

```bash
vault attach
```

This is simply a convenient wrapper around `docker exec -it <vault-continer-name><env_vars> sh`
